Discriminant analysis (#105)
aml4td/website: chapters/cls-nonlinear.qmd

There are two important variations of discriminant analysis. One is a useful simplification of the model (naive Bayes), and the other is a generalization that can include automatic feature selection, nonlinearities, and other helpful characteristics (called _flexible_ discriminant analysis (FDA)).

### Naive Bayes {#sec-naive-bayes}

LDA estimates $Pr[\boldsymbol{x}|Y = k]$ via a multivariate Gaussian probability. Naive Bayes [@hand2001idiot], on the other hand, takes a different tack and decomposes that probability calculation into a product of $p$ separate distributions for each predictor: 

$$
Pr[\boldsymbol{x}|Y = k] = \prod_{j=1}^p Pr[x_j|Y = k] 
$$ {#eq-ind-probs}

This makes the inherent assumption that our predictors are all statistically independent of one another. For most datasets, this is unlikely to be true. 

> However, it does loosen the distributional assumption of each variable. We don't have to assume normality and, in fact, we don't even have to declare a full parametric probability distribution. Kernel density estimates [@Silverman86;@chen2017tutorial] are a type of smoother that adaptively describes the data. Here, a _kernel_ is a function^[We'll see kernel functions two more times in this chapter.] that produces non-negative values that serve as weights. For example, a uniform kernel assigns equal weights to values between two points, a Gaussian kernel uses a squared exponential function (i.e., $K(x) = \exp(x^2)$), and so on. The density estimate is formed by using a running kernel function across the data. At each point, the density function is computed, generating a weight that is larger for points closest to our observed data. As we move across the observed data, the weights accumulate so that their sum is larger when closer to the actual data. The type of kernel function defines how the weight is distributed near the point. For a uniform kernel, the weight is the same within a neighborhood of the point, and for a Gaussian, the weight is largest at the actual point and then decreases exponentially as we move away. 

Author: I could use some extra scrutiny of this paragraph.

## Nonlinear Discriminants  {#sec-nonlinear-da}

> Discriminant analysis is a traditional statistical method for classification. Its relevance has waned over the years, but we'll discuss it because it has led to some interesting and highly functional extensions. Our initial focus is on linear discriminant analysis (LDA).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Discriminant analysis is a classical statistical method for classification. While its prominence in the statistical learning literature has diminished in recent decades, understanding its foundations provides valuable context for several modern and highly effective classification methods. This section focuses on linear discriminant analysis (LDA).
```

> Linear discriminant analysis [@mclachlan2005discriminant;@murphy2012machine] produces linear class boundaries and can be motivated via Bayes' Rule. If our training set predictors for class $k$ are contained in $\boldsymbol{X}_k$, we assume that these data have a multivariate Gaussian distribution with a class-specific mean vector and a common covariance matrix: $\boldsymbol{X}_k \sim N(\boldsymbol{\mu}_k, \boldsymbol{\Sigma})$. In terms of Bayes' Rule, this is $Pr[Y = k|\boldsymbol{x}]$ where $\boldsymbol{x}$ is a vector of $p$ numeric predictors (for a single data point). If $Pr[Y = k]$ is our prior probability of the outcome being class $k$, then our prediction equation is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Linear discriminant analysis [@mclachlan2005discriminant;@murphy2012machine] produces linear classification boundaries and can be motivated via Bayes’ Rule. The method assumes that the predictor distributions within each class follow a multivariate Gaussian distribution with class-specific mean vectors but a common covariance matrix across all classes. Formally, for class $k$, the conditional distribution of the predictors given class membership is $\boldsymbol{X}|Y=k \sim N(\boldsymbol{\mu}_k, \boldsymbol{\Sigma})$.

To classify a new observation with predictor vector $\boldsymbol{x}$ (of dimension $p$), LDA applies Bayes' theorem to compute the posterior probability of class membership. Given a prior probability $Pr[Y = k]$ for class $k$, the posterior probability is:
```

$$ {#eq-discrim}

This equation is straightforward to calculate. Using the training data, we can calculate our standard maximum likelihood estimates for the mean vector and covariance matrix, $\bar{\boldsymbol{x}}_k$ and $\boldsymbol{S}$, respectively. Using these, the multivariate normal probability is the most complex part of the equation (but is trivial to compute with modern software). Additionally, we can save time by computing only the numerator of @eq-discrim for each class and then normalizing the probabilities so that they sum to 1.0. When classifying a new data point $\boldsymbol{x}$, we can plug it into @eq-discrim, along with the prior probabilities, and produce a posterior probability for each class. The hard class prediction corresponds ot the class with the largest posterior. Alternatively, we can frame the prediction in terms of the discriminant function: 

$$
D_k(\boldsymbol{x}) = \boldsymbol{x}'\boldsymbol{\Sigma}^{-1}\boldsymbol{\mu}_k + \frac{1}{2}\boldsymbol{\mu}_k'\boldsymbol{\Sigma}^{-1}\boldsymbol{\mu}_k + \log\left(Pr[Y = k]\right)
$$ {#eq-discrim-func}

> The discriminant values are not dissimilar from the linear predictor in logistic regression. They take values on the real line, and larger values are indicative of higher (posterior) probabilities. The class associated with the largest discriminant value is taken as the hard class prediction. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The discriminant values are conceptually similarity to the linear predictor in logistic regression, taking values on the real line where larger values correspond to higher posterior probabilities. The predicted class is determined by identifying which discriminant function yields the maximum value. 
```

> One nice feature of LDA is that $\boldsymbol{\Sigma}$ models the covariance/correlation structure of the predictors. This means that moderate multicollinearity isn't an issue for LDA. Additionally, this equation is applicable to any number of classes. However, if there are linear dependencies in the data or if the number of rows in the training set is smaller than $p$, the covariance matrix is singular and we cannot compute the probability. Indicator columns could be awkwardly used in this model; they are numbers, so the probabilities could be computed. However, variables comprised of two whole numbers are most certainly not Gaussian. It defeats the purpose of using this model. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A notable advantage of LDA is its explicit modeling of the predictor covariance structure through $\boldsymbol{\Sigma}$. This characteristic renders the method robust to moderate levels of multicollinearity among predictors. Furthermore, the framework naturally extends to multi-class problems. 

However, LDA has important limitations. The method requires that $\boldsymbol{\Sigma}$ be non-singular (invertible). When the training set contains fewer observations than predictors ($n < p$) or when perfect linear dependencies exist among predictors, the sample covariance matrix becomes singular and the discriminant functions cannot be computed. Additionally, the Gaussian distributional assumption is fundamental to the method's theoretical justification. While binary indicator variables can technically be included in the model (as they are numeric), their discrete, non-Gaussian nature violates the model assumptions and undermines the probabilistic interpretation of the results. For datasets with categorical predictors or high-dimensional settings where $n < p$, alternative classification methods may be more appropriate as we will see later.
```

As is, LDA is not a versatile or powerful tool. It produces linear boundaries. If we were to induce nonlinear boundaries via feature engineering, logistic regression would be a much better choice. 

There are many variations and extensions of discriminant analysis. The covariance matrix can be class-specific, leading to quadratic discriminant analysis (QDA) [@ghojogh2019linear], where the class boundaries are low-level polynomials. There are also robust versions of these models that are independent of distributional outliers [@hubert2024robust], as well as regularized discriminants that attempt to reduce the complexity of the covariance matrices [@friedman1989regularized;@pang2009shrinkage]. 

> There are two important variations of discriminant analysis. One is a useful simplification of the model (naive Bayes), and the other is a generalization that can include automatic feature selection, nonlinearities, and other helpful characteristics (called _flexible_ discriminant analysis (FDA)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two extensions of discriminant analysis are practically useful. The first, naive Bayes classification, represents a simplification that assumes conditional independence among predictors within each class. The second, flexible discriminant analysis (FDA), is a generalization of the framework. FDA can accommodate nonlinear decision boundaries, perform implicit feature selection, and incorporate various modeling strategies, making it a considerably more versatile tool for classification problems. These methods are discussed in the following sections.
```

### Naive Bayes {#sec-naive-bayes}

> LDA estimates $Pr[\boldsymbol{x}|Y = k]$ via a multivariate Gaussian probability. Naive Bayes [@hand2001idiot], on the other hand, takes a different tack and decomposes that probability calculation into a product of $p$ separate distributions for each predictor: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While LDA estimates the class-conditional density $Pr[\boldsymbol{x}|Y = k]$ using a multivariate Gaussian distribution, naive Bayes [@hand2001idiot] adopts an alternative approach by decomposing this joint density into a product of univariate marginal distributions:
```

$$
Pr[\boldsymbol{x}|Y = k] = \prod_{j=1}^p Pr[x_j|Y = k] 
$$ {#eq-ind-probs}

This makes the inherent assumption that our predictors are all statistically independent of one another. For most datasets, this is unlikely to be true. 

> However, it does loosen the distributional assumption of each variable. We don't have to assume normality and, in fact, we don't even have to declare a full parametric probability distribution. Kernel density estimates [@Silverman86;@chen2017tutorial] are a type of smoother that adaptively describes the data. Here, a _kernel_ is a function^[We'll see kernel functions two more times in this chapter.] that produces non-negative values that serve as weights. For example, a uniform kernel assigns equal weights to values between two points, a Gaussian kernel uses a squared exponential function (i.e., $K(x) = \exp(x^2)$), and so on. The density estimate is formed by using a running kernel function across the data. At each point, the density function is computed, generating a weight that is larger for points closest to our observed data. As we move across the observed data, the weights accumulate so that their sum is larger when closer to the actual data. The type of kernel function defines how the weight is distributed near the point. For a uniform kernel, the weight is the same within a neighborhood of the point, and for a Gaussian, the weight is largest at the actual point and then decreases exponentially as we move away. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The primary advantage of the conditional independence assumption is that it relaxes the distributional requirements for individual predictors. Unlike LDA, which requires joint multivariate normality, naive Bayes allows each predictor to follow its own distribution, which does not need to be Gaussian. Moreover, these distributions do not even need to be fully parametric. 

For continuous predictors, kernel density estimation [@Silverman86;@chen2017tutorial] provides a flexible, nonparametric approach to estimating $Pr[x_j|Y = k]$. Kernel density estimators are smoothing methods that adaptively characterize the empirical distribution of the data. A kernel function $K(\cdot)$ is a non-negative, symmetric function that integrates to one and serves as a weighting scheme^[We'll see kernel functions two more times in this chapter.].  Common kernel functions are:

* The **uniform kernel**, which assigns equal weight to all observations within a fixed range
* The **Gaussian kernel**, $K(u) = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi}}\exp(-u^2/2)$, which assigns weights that decrease exponentially with distance from the point of interest

The kernel density estimate at a point $x$ is constructed as:

$$
\hat{f}(x) = \frac{1}{nh}\sum_{i=1}^n K\left(\frac{x - x_i}{h}\right)
$$

where $n$ is the number of observations, $x_i$ are the observed data points, and $h$ is the bandwidth parameter that controls the smoothness of the estimate.  We’ll come back to the bandwidth parameter shortly.
```

@hand1981discrimination, @breiman1984nonlinear, and others had shown that the LDA model can be estimated using a series of basic linear regressions. To do this, we first create an $n_{tr}\times C$ matrix $\boldsymbol{Y}$ of class indicators where there is a column for each class that contains binary indicators for the corresponding class level. We also create a $C\times C-1$ matrix of initial "scores" $\boldsymbol{\Omega}$ using a contrast function (previously described in @sec-indicators). @mda_2024 use a Hemlert-like contrast matrix. For $C=3$ classes, the Helmert contrast is 

$$
Helmert = 
\begin{pmatrix} 
-1 & -1 \\ 
\phantom{-}  1 & -1 \\ 
\phantom{-}  0 &\phantom{-}   2 \\ 
\end{pmatrix}
$$

then normalize it using a function of class proportions in the training set. For example, if there were $C = 3$ classes in the outcome with equal frequencies, the initial score matrix could be:

$$
\boldsymbol{\Omega} = 
\begin{pmatrix} 
\phantom{-} 1.22 & -0.71 \\ 
-1.22 & -0.71 \\ 
\phantom{-} 0.00 & \phantom{-} 1.41 \\ 
\end{pmatrix}
$$

Being a contrast matrix, the column means are zero and have covariances of zero. 

> We can create the artificial columns for our linear regressions by computing $\boldsymbol{\Omega}^* = \boldsymbol{Y}\boldsymbol{\Omega}$. Using our predictor set and the columns of $\boldsymbol{\Omega}^*$ as the outcomes, a multivariate linear regression is conducted to produce a matrix of regression parameters $\widehat{\boldsymbol{B}}$ and predictions $\hat{\boldsymbol{\Omega}} = \boldsymbol{X}'\hat{\boldsymbol{B}}$. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response matrix for linear regression is computed as $\boldsymbol{\Omega}^* = \boldsymbol{Y}\boldsymbol{\Omega}$. Using the predictor matrix $\boldsymbol{X}$ and the columns of $\boldsymbol{\Omega}^*$ as outcomes, multivariate linear regression yields coefficient matrix $\widehat{\boldsymbol{B}}$ and fitted values $\hat{\boldsymbol{\Omega}} = \boldsymbol{X}\hat{\boldsymbol{B}}$.
```

$$
y_i = \beta_0 + \beta_1 h(x_{i1} - a) + \beta_2 h(a - x_{i1}) + \epsilon_i
$$

and estimated using ordinary linear regression. The figure above shows examples of the segmented regression model that is created for different values of $\beta_1$ and $\beta_2$. 

The "growing" phase of MARS creates new pairs of features for each iteration but adding perspective pairs to the existing regression model and monitoring performance. The pair that improves the model the most is retained, and the process repeats until a predefined number of terms is reached.  

During the training process, MARS can split on the same variable multiple times. This can occur when there is significant curvature in the relationship between a predictor and the outcome. For categorical predictors, it automatically creates $C$ binary indicators that can also be used for splitting. MARS can also choose to add a predictor into the model without hinge functions (i.e., as is) if that is the best representation for the model at that time. We can define the maximum number of model terms that should be included; this is an important tuning parameter. 

> So far, we have described what occurs when MARS is constrained to produce an _additive model_ (i.e., there is one predictor per model term). Alternatively, we can also allow the training process to include interaction terms. Once it selects a new pair of terms to add to the model, it can conduct a secondary search to find a different predictor (and split value) that pairs best with the initial two sibling features. This results in four new terms being added to the model, each isolating a two-dimensional region of the predictor space it affects. The choice of an additive or a second degree is a tuning parameter. Higher-level interactions are possible but become computationally infeasible at some point. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus far, we have described MARS when it is constrained to produce an _additive_model (i.e. where each feature depends on a single predictor).  MARS can also generate interaction terms. After selecting an initial pair of hinge functions on one predictor, the algorithm conducts a secondary search over all other predictors (and their candidate split points) to find the combination that most improves the model. This produces four new features, each representing a distinct two-dimensional region of the predictor space. The degree of interaction (typically one or two) is a tuning parameter; higher-order interactions are possible but become computationally prohibitive.
```

```{r}
#| label: fig-forested-fda-imp
#| echo: false
#| out-width: 80%
#| fig-width: 6.5
#| fig-height: 3
#| fig-cap: MARS feature importance for the final forested model.

fda_imp |> 
  ggplot(aes(gcv, reorder(text, gcv))) + 
  geom_point() +
  labs(y = NULL, x = "MARS Importance (GCV)")
```

The FDA via MARS is an interesting technique in that, on the spectrum ranging from fully interpretable models to black-box techniques, it falls somewhere in between. It might not yield the absolutely optimal performance, but it can often get close _and_ be well explained using visualizations, especially when the model is additive. 

> For example, suppose that we chose an additive model based on the patterns shown in @fig-fda-tune. In this case, the shape of the relationship between the predictor and the outcome is independent of the other predictors. The values of the other predictors do affect the range of predicted probabilities for a predictor, but the profile shape is the same. With an additive model, we can plot profiles of the predictor values versus the probability of the event. @fig-fda-profiles shows an example from an additive fit. With this, we can describe how the model works in more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, suppose we chose an additive model based on the tuning results in @fig-fda-tune. In an additive model, the functional form relating each predictor to the outcome is independent of the other predictors. Although the values of other predictors shift the range of predicted probabilities, the shape of each predictor's effect remains constant. This property enables us to construct partial dependence plots showing how predicted class probabilities vary with each predictor while holding others fixed. @fig-fda-profiles illustrates such profiles from an additive fit, enabling an interpretation of the model's behavior.
```

df_medians <- 
  forested_train |> 
  dplyr::select(-class, -county) |> 
  map_dbl(median) |> 
  tibble::as_tibble_row() |> 
  mutate(county = forested_train$county[1])

additive_preds <- NULL
for (i in seq_along(additive_num_terms)) {
  nm <- additive_num_terms[i]
  rng <- range(forested_train[[nm]])
  grid <- 
    tibble(x = seq(rng[1], rng[2], length.out = 500)) |> 
    setNames(nm) |> 
    vctrs::vec_cbind(df_medians |> dplyr::select(-all_of(nm)))
  
  prd <- 
    augment(fda_additive_fit, grid, type = "prob") |> 
    dplyr::select(all_of(nm), .pred_Yes) |> 
    setNames(c("value", "probability")) |> 
    mutate(variable = nm)
  
  additive_preds <- bind_rows(additive_preds, prd)
}

additive_preds <- 
  additive_preds |> 
  full_join(name_key, by = "variable") |> 
  mutate(Predictor = if_else(is.na(text), variable, text)) |> 
  filter(!is.na(probability))

additive_preds |> 
  ggplot(aes(value, probability)) + 
  geom_line() + 
  facet_wrap(~ Predictor, scale = "free") + 
  theme() +
  theme(axis.text.y = element_blank()) +
  labs(y = "Relative Probability", x = NULL)
```

For example, we can say that: 

- The probability of forestation appears to jump after 2020. 

> - When the annual precipitation at a location is greater than 500, the probability significantly increases and remains high (all other factors being equal). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The probability increases sharply when annual precipitation exceeds approximately 500 mm and remains elevated thereafter (holding other predictors constant).
```

> - The downward spike in longitude corresponds to the unforested area east of Seattle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The downward spike in the longitude corresponds to the unforested region east of Seattle.
```
